So welcome to Cocoa from Ruby and Python.
We've got some pretty exciting
stuff to talk about here.
I'm Bill Baumgartner.
I'm the manager of the sort of
chewy middle layers in Xcode,
build system, things like that.
And, you know, scripting languages
have become really hot.
I mean, they've been hot for a while,
but they're really getting out there.
They're becoming very popular.
And people are using them to build
larger and larger things as well.
Now, some of the reasons for this
popularity is that they really offer
a rapid application development
methodology or patterns that you just
can't do with compiled languages.
Likewise, scripting languages are often
considered to be batteries included,
meaning that the scripting languages
come with these huge libraries.
They're really easy to use,
and they do some very powerful things.
Or you can pick up libraries
from third parties.
And I am.
I asked the O'Reilly.
O'Reilly folks for some numbers,
and they were very kind to give it to me.
These are book sales in the
last year and changes over time.
And as you can see,
Pearl's off a little bit,
but still a pretty good-sized chunk.
Ruby's up 700%, largely because of Rails.
Python's climbing,
even though nothing's really
happened in the last year.
So, yeah, scripting languages,
they're here, and everyone's using them.
And Cocoa developers really
shouldn't be left out of this fun.
So why?
Why bother?
Well, it gets down to the rapid
application development thing.
Thanks for the demo machine.
When we were doing Core Data,
one of the biggest challenges when
you're coming up with a new API is,
can you use it?
Does it feel comfortable?
So literally within the first, oh,
I don't know,
week or so of having an Xcode project
that was the Core Data framework,
I was able to bring up my Python shell.
import the foundation because well you
always have to have a foundation and
then i could um let me grab objective
c too i could then just load bundle
I don't remember how to use Load Bundle.
It's another great
Rapid App development feature.
I can actually get help.
Oh, I need to see the help though.
So if I do, obviously, load bundle,
core data,
I'm going to just throw it right
into my interpreter because,
well, that's a useful place for it.
I can now go off and I could, you know,
create a managed object model.
I could work with the APIs.
I could do whatever.
And then because of what
I'm going to show you next,
I could then turn around and
turn these into unit tests.
I could turn them into a full-blown app.
I could do all my prototyping.
So you're going straight from
interacting with your live objects
through to building production apps.
Can I have the slides, please?
So this is our commitment.
We, Apple, are embracing scripting
languages as first-class
application development tools.
This includes binary
compatibility across releases.
So...
If you build an app with Ruby,
Cocoa or PyOpc as shipped with Leopard
and drag and drop that onto 10.whatever,
11.whatever, whatever the next OS is,
it should work.
And if it doesn't, it's our bug.
So what do we have today?
Well, right now,
most of your scripting languages out
there already do a lot of bridging.
And in particular,
they bridge to the system layers.
So you have all the BSD,
BSD-like APIs are wrapped up
in the scripting languages.
Many of them provide GUI toolkits,
WX Python, there's Ruby TK or something,
I can't remember which one it is,
but there's a bunch of different ones.
The problem though is that they don't
support building truly native apps.
You build one of these,
an app with like WX Python and
it looks like lipstick on a pig.
It just does not look and feel like a
real Cocoa app or a real Carbon app.
So, then comes the question of
which languages to support.
And, well, which language is better?
It's not interesting,
and since this is only a half day,
we don't have the hours to discuss it.
However, what you want, though,
is a language with a strong
object-oriented theme.
And you really want ones
for us that already have
high-quality bridges because,
well,
that's less work and we already know the
community is adopting and has momentum.
And for Leopard,
we're committing to Ruby and Python.
So, why Ruby?
Well,
it's object-oriented from the ground up.
It's obviously a very popular
language and it's growing.
And beyond everything being an object,
it also has a very dynamic
philosophy of implementation
that's close to the Cocoa model.
And there's the Ruby Cocoa Bridge,
which is excellent and
getting much better,
and it's been in development since 2001.
Similarly, why Python?
Well, Python has a very mature
object-oriented model.
It has a few warts, but not too bad.
Though it also supports
functional and procedural,
it's a very flexible language.
It is designed to be
embedded and bridged,
etc.
And there's lots and lots of
modules out there that demonstrate
how to do this kind of thing.
But there's also the PyOpsy Bridge,
which has actually been
in development since 1994,
came up on Next Step.
Well,
it was forged in hell of Wall Street.
I don't know how many of you
have ever done financial apps,
but when you go to a trader
and you tell them that,
well, you're $150 million,
don't know where it is.
They get really irritated.
So PyOpsy was developed in that
kind of an environment and has a
real focus on producing the right
answer and doing so consistently.
So why not some of these other languages?
Well, Perl, we asked a lot of people and
there wasn't a lot of interest in
developing Cocoa apps with Perl.
And there's CamelBones,
which is an excellent third-party bridge.
So if you want to use Perl,
go use CamelBones.
There's the Cocoa Java bridge,
while it's being deprecated.
And is this going to happen
to the scripting languages?
No.
The Cocoa Java bridge was, um...
Not the most easily
maintained implementation.
There was a lot of manual mapping.
There was a lot of trying to
make Cocoa feel like Java.
And because of that, it was just a really
hard bridge to maintain.
And because of the impedance
mismatch between Java,
Java wants really strong typing and
it wants to know things up front.
And Cocoa Objective-C,
which tends to be very
late-binding and dynamic,
just didn't fit well.
There's also Fscript,
which as you saw in the design awards,
did quite nicely.
Fscript is an incredibly powerful tool,
but it's not really for
building full-blown apps.
It's much more something
you might use to embed as a
scripting language for your app,
or you can use it as an
amazing debugging tool.
So with that,
I'd like to ask Laurent to come up
and show a little bit of Ruby Cocoa.
Good morning, everyone.
So my name is Laurent Sansonetti.
I work for the CodeOS group inside Apple,
and I'm here to show you a
quick demo of the Ruby bridge.
So in the part,
we intend to provide a nice integration.
We intend to nicely integrate
the scripting bridges with
the Apple developer tools like
Xcode and Interface Builder.
And in the seeds you have in hands,
there is already some preliminary
support for Ruby Cocoa.
So let's just open our demo project.
So most of the files in this
project has been generated by Xcode.
You have this main.m file
that you should be used to.
This main.m file is mostly the same as
you see in regular Cocoa applications.
It's just that instead of
calling NSApplicationMain,
we call RBApplicationMain,
which will initialize the
Ruby Cocoa runtime environment.
This Ruby script will be executed
just after the initialization.
We load all the Ruby scripts
present in the resource directory
of your application vendor.
And then we call the
regular NSApplicationMate.
So let's have a quick look
at the user interface.
So it's pretty simple in fact.
We just have a text field here,
here we have a slider,
and the main view is from a new
framework in Leopard called ImageKit.
ImageKit is a new framework,
so a meme to be used to browse and
display images and stuff like that.
And here we're just using the image
browser view of this framework.
We have here a class that inherits from
NSWindowController and we made all the
specific connections and stuff like that.
The Ruby implementation of
this class is pretty simple.
So as you can see,
we just inherit from NSWindowController,
as we would do in Objective-C.
It's pretty trivial.
Here we declare the only outlet we have.
So this is the image with a view.
So this is initialization stuff.
Here we have the two actions we have.
The first one is for the slider,
and the second one will be
activated when you enter
something in the URL text field.
We just parse the contents of the URL,
and then we parse using
the RSS library from Ruby,
in fact, from the Ruby standard library.
So we just parse the
contents of the given URL,
and we keep that in the cache.
Oops.
Here, oh, but in addition.
Oh.
Anyway.
[Transcript missing]
- More or less, okay.
So this is the data source
implementation of the ImageBrowserView.
The first method just returns
the number of items in the view,
and the second one,
you need to return an object,
For a specific index in the view,
this object has to conform
to a certain protocol.
Here we return an instance
of the RSS photo class,
and I will come to that later.
So here is the RSS photo class.
So this is the magic stuff here.
This class is a pure Ruby class.
It doesn't iterate for
NSObject or stuff like that.
So it's a pure Ruby class,
and the magic is that we're going to
pass instance of that class across
the bridge to the ImageKit framework.
And the bridge is going to create
proxy objects for each instance of
that class and pass proxy objects
back to the Objective-C underlying
stuff like ImageKit.
And ImageKit is going sometimes to
call back methods of the proxy object,
and the bridge is just going to forward
everything back to the Ruby class.
So here these are...
These are three callbacks that
will be called by ImageKit.
And here we just returned
an NSImage class,
an NSImage object based on
the contents of the URL.
So let's see if it works.
There we go.
So I'm just using the
Flickr feed for WWDC tag,
so all the image tagged with WWDC.
And it works.
So we can use a slider to zoom,
stuff like that.
And it's pretty simple.
In fact, it's
I don't have the number of lines,
but I think it's just 18 lines of code,
so pretty simple.
So as you can see,
it's pretty easy to glue existing pure
Ruby code with Objective-C frameworks.
So in that case, we used the RSS library,
part of the Santa Ruby distribution,
and we used this new
ImageKit framework and Cocoa,
of course.
Thank you.
Thank you, Laurent.
So as Laurent demonstrated, I mean,
it feels like building a Cocoa app
only with a scripting language.
So the state of the bridges.
This is kind of where are they,
where are we going.
So the bridges, they all allow mixing of
Objective-C and scripted code.
And this really gives you the freedom to
prototype and implement in the scripting
language using the rapid application
development patterns that I mentioned,
and then turn around and optimize
performance-critical pieces by porting
those pieces to Objective-C if necessary.
And you can use these to
build production quality apps.
There's applications today that
ship written with Python against
Cocoa that you could buy in
a box at the Apple Store,
and you'll never know the difference.
Same thing with Ruby Cocoa.
And the PyOpC bridge at least,
and I'm now getting reports
about Ruby Cocoa as well,
has been used in a lot
of research facilities.
Lawrence Livermore,
Sandia Labs both use it.
Trading houses, like I mentioned before,
engineering groups, both Pixar and Apple,
have used PyOpC quite a bit.
And the unfortunate part about the
state of these bridges on Tiger is
that to maintain compatibility and
make sure that a software update or
something else doesn't break you,
you have to embed the runtime,
the bridge and the language
interpreter in your dot app.
It's about a, I think, what, six,
eight meg penalty, something like that.
And that's really what we're focusing on.
We want to fix that.
We don't want you to have
to drag that garbage along.
And we want to make sure that if
we ship a software update with,
say, a security fix for something,
then your app takes advantage of it.
So Cocoa and Objective-C really
provide the most natural point
for doing this kind of bridging.
And that's largely because most
of your scripting languages,
even if they're not object-oriented,
they have a very
object-oriented feel about them.
You're always dealing with some
random thing that you put a dot
and then tell it to do something.
And on the other end of the bridge,
the Objective-C runtime provides
all this metadata at runtime,
live metadata,
that describes all the APIs on
all the classes and the instance
variables and everything else.
And now with Objective-C 2.0,
there's actually a lot more
metadata available about things
like properties and stuff like that.
And this metadata is rich enough
that we can handle most of the
APIs provided in the frameworks
automatically in the bridges themselves.
The one key point and the first
thing you run into is method names.
How do you map a method name,
which has a bunch of colons in it,
into a language that doesn't
allow colons and names?
We choose a very simple rule.
This is what PyOpc's
been doing for 14 years,
12 years, 12 years, whatever.
And that's every colon
in the method name,
in the selector name,
you simply substitute an
underscore and you're done.
There's no ambiguity,
there's no exceptions.
We don't have any magic mapping files,
which the Java Bridge did,
or special cases.
Actually, in Laurent's demo,
he demonstrated a version of
Ruby Cocoa that has a convenience
mapping in it where you can
drop the last underscore.
That won't be supported out
of the box in Leopard because,
again,
this is about forward compatibility and
really ensuring a consistent environment.
At the same time,
we're not going to actively
prevent anyone from adding
those kinds of dispatchers in.
So when you talk about methods,
there's more to them than just the name.
There's also the signature.
And the signature-- well,
in a scripting language,
typically there's no types
that are really declared.
I mean, sure, there's types when you
get under the covers.
But you don't say, hey,
I'm going to take a string
argument and then an integer
argument and then an NS table view.
Which is problematic
because in Objective-C,
method arguments very
much have explicit types.
Now the bridge,
what it generally does is it will
try to derive the typing information
from the superclass or from context.
And what that means is that if you
override a method in subclasses,
because we support
subclassing in both bridges,
then the fact that that method takes
an integer and an ID will be grabbed
from the superclass if at all possible.
Or if it's a delegate method or protocol,
it'll grab it from that.
The problem though is that
that's not always enough.
So this is the one area where
things on the script side of the
bridge get a little different.
The bridges provide hints for
specifying this additional metadata.
In the Python bridge, PyOpc,
you have @ decorators.
We're using the decorators
from Python 2.4.
So if you say @ typed accessor with an i,
that's going to make a method
on the Objective-C side that
takes an integer as an argument,
and it's a true integer.
Or it's going to return an integer
if you wanted to just have quantity.
At class method is used to declare
class methods on the Python side,
because Python doesn't
have class methods.
Likewise in Ruby, Ruby has the,
can't remember the name,
these decorators for the declarations.
So you can say flag auto update
enabled is a KVC/KVO compatible
attribute of this class.
So now there are still some obstacles,
because really Objective-C is just
ANSI C with a bunch of extensions.
And the C bits are really hard.
Effectively, C is a macro assembler,
so you get to deal with
grunging through memory.
Yes, yay, except for when it bites you.
So things like NSErrorPointerPointer.
Well, that in and of itself
isn't that hard to handle,
except for the fact that
in some cases it goes out.
Some cases, the things like that go in.
Sometimes they go in and out.
And there's not a consistent amount of
metadata in the runtime to know that.
Likewise,
you have sometimes paired arguments
where one argument tells you how to
properly deal with the other one.
If you have, like, say,
a float pointer with a count and you
run off the end of that or make a guess,
your program's going to blow up.
Memory management.
So Objective-C has retained release,
auto-release.
The scripting languages are
typically garbage collected.
Python has reference counting.
Ruby has a garbage collector.
And that can be a challenge.
And so are exceptions.
Every language seems to feel the
need to invent a new exception model.
And as we cross the bridge,
what we actually do is convert the
exceptions between the two languages.
So if you have an NSException raised in
Objective-C and it passes through Ruby,
it's going to be a Ruby exception.
Then as it goes back into Objective-C,
it'll be turned back into the
same NSException as before.
On the memory management front,
conveniently reference
counting is a natural match.
So the bridges actually take care
of all the rest of the stuff.
So it's a nice little feature
that you can actually take care
of all the retained release,
auto-release for you.
Frankly, programming in Python against
Objective-C or Ruby against
Objective-C feels a lot
like using Objective-C 2.0.
There's also other kinds of arguments
that the metadata won't describe.
And of course,
what about garbage collection?
Well, neither bridge uses the
garbage collector at this time.
We're investigating ways
of integrating that.
But frankly, because the bridge has
managed routine release,
auto-release for you,
when you're on the scripting
language side of the bridge,
you really don't miss it.
When you're on the other
side of the bridge,
of course, writing your own code,
you will need to deal with retain,
release, auto-release for now.
So clearing out these obstacles,
what we're adding is a big
chunk of metadata to describe
all these difficult bits.
And the metadata will be loaded
by the bridges at runtime.
So we're moving away from some of
the static wrapping methodologies
that were used in PyOpc and moving
to an automatic system that will
allow the metadata to describe,
for example, which methods return a
Boolean versus a character,
which is critical to Ruby and
very convenient for Python.
It'll also include other information,
because there's a bunch of symbols in
your frameworks that don't get exported,
like your sharp defines,
your type def and nums.
Functions,
they'll be exported as a symbol,
but they don't have a
signature for knowing what
types of arguments they take.
Sharp defines,
this is again going to be read when your
script or your application starts up.
We are, of course,
looking to make that as fast as possible.
So there's some additional
features to these bridges.
There's native types in
all of the languages,
Objective-C, in Python and in Ruby,
that really are the same basic
underlying data structure,
even if they have a
little bit different APIs.
And to really make the languages usable,
you want the Objective-C types
to fit well with that.
So the bridges do a no-cost or a
very low-cost sort of bridging-like
core foundation to the foundation.
And what this results in is that
you can write code like this,
where you're saying,
"For some bundle..." I see
my "for" was capitalized.
Don't do that.
So, "For a bundle in
NSFramework.allFrameworks."
That will enable you to do that.
So you can enumerate the array,
the NSArray returned by all frameworks,
and the second line is just going to
print out the bundle path of each one.
Likewise in Ruby, using the block syntax,
there's enumeration of arrays.
And this extends also
for some other types.
nd we'll talk about the key
value coding and observing.
Supporting key value coding and observing
is critical to making a high-fidelity
Cocoa development experience.
It's the only way that
Cocoa bindings will work,
for example.
Both of the bridges support automatic
key value coding and observing,
and they do so at assignment as
opposed to having to call the methods,
so again, very Objective-C 2.0-like.
These lines of code are all equivalent,
so if you just do
myManagedObject.someAttribute
= something,
that's going to trigger KVC/KVO.
Likewise, KVO is automatic,
so even in a non-managed object,
making an assignment to an
instance variable is going to cause
the KVO notifications to fire.
This actually greatly reduces the number
of lines of code you end up writing too.
So, there's also declaring
instance variables.
You saw earlier how Ruby you
could declare an instance
variable to be a KVC variable.
In PyOpc Python,
there's a function on the Opc
module which allows you to
create an instance variable,
and this actually,
when the class is dynamically created,
will create a slot for
a float named count.
And this will behave the same
as using a typed accessor,
if that's the way you want to go.
Of course, a lot fewer lines of code.
So performance.
You know,
one of the things that always comes
up whenever I've wanted to use
a bridge on a project is someone
starts whining about the performance.
And the reality is that
in most of our apps,
Cocoa is what's really doing
the heavy lifting for us.
Your code generally is not going
to be the one that's being executed
all the time when you're doing like
Core Data filling in an S table view.
Now, there is of course going to be
random algorithms or whatever
other performance-intensive
code you might write,
and you can easily port that
to Objective-C as needed,
with the caveat being of course that you
did the performance analysis first to
make sure you're not wasting your time.
There is a cost associated
with crossing the bridge.
Like I said before, exception bridging,
it exists, it happens.
It's expensive simply because setting up
and tearing down Objective-C exception
handling blocks is expensive.
The argument return values
are boxed or converted,
meaning that you can't just
pass a random integer into,
say, Python because it's gonna blow up.
So it needs to be turned into a
Python integer or a Ruby integer,
et cetera.
And you really just want to avoid
tight performance-sensitive loops that
are constantly crossing the bridge.
If you just kind of keep that in mind,
I don't think you're going to have a lot
of problems with performance on these.
It just really isn't that big of a deal.
So I wanted to do a quick tour of PyEbc.
So this is actually a project that
I started not terribly long ago.
We have the dedicated network builds,
and we're playing with
visualization ideas.
And I'm going to run it just so you can
see the god-awful hideous colors that
I have right now for testing purposes.
So you can see it's doing stuff, yay.
But what this is doing under the
covers is actually pretty interesting,
because it's listening on a UDP port,
waiting for notifications to
come in from random machines.
Then it's taking that data,
tearing it apart into a dictionary,
throwing the dictionary over the
wall to a Core Data in-memory store,
saving everything in that,
which then triggers a
context-did-save notification,
which gets listened to,
which then updates the view.
So the reason why I actually did
this as a PyOpc app is because
I could take advantage of Twisted.
Twisted is a third-party network
application development environment.
It's like the AppKit for network apps.
It's amazing.
And it saved me a huge amount of code.
I don't know how many of you have
ever done network programming,
but dealing with TCP sockets and
UDP datagrams is usually a real pain.
But this right here is all the code
it took to set that listener up.
And this is using a subclass
of a visualization protocol.
This is the entire code for... Well,
here, let me just delete the
code we don't need.
Yeah, my tab width is hosed,
so I'm not going to edit
anything or else it blows up.
Yeah, here's a hint.
You saw it in Laurent's demo.
You've seen it now in mine.
Turn off tabs in Xcode before you
start dealing with scripting languages.
And somebody please
file a bug against that,
because I need to make that a default.
That's the biggest source
of problem with all this.
So, you know, this is really hard in C.
This is hard in CF socket,
but you see how much code
I've reduced by using this.
And then you'll see in my project,
I'm mixing and matching
Objective-C and Python at whim.
For example, I've got one managed object
as an Objective-C object,
another managed object
as a Python object.
My app delegate is a random Python class.
And let me show you a couple of
interesting features in here.
This right here
What's actually happening
is when Python comes up,
because we've got this wonderful
dynamic runtime that likes
to compose things on the fly,
I'm going and I'm reading the
specification of the class
AppDelegate from the nib file.
It's figuring out the superclass,
the outlets, the actions,
and then Objective-C or PyOpC,
using this auto-base class notation,
is actually defining that class on
the fly with all the appropriate
outlets and instance variables.
So if I go into Interface Builder
and I make a change there,
I don't have to sync anything in my code.
It just works.
You'll also see things like this where,
you know, on the one hand,
I wanted to put a
debugging thing in here,
fake it, man,
and I wanted to run an external program.
Well, the fastest way to check for
a program is to use this,
but the fastest way to
launch one was to use nstask.
So you really get to mix
and match whatever tools you
need to get your job done.
Let's see.
This is interesting just
in that if we go down here,
yes, this line right here.
This code here.
So whenever a machine notifies my
computer and it goes off and it says,
hey, I've just started a job,
I need to create a new job entity
in a managed object context.
And it's just a matter of doing the
typical Objective-C thing of this.
I'll admit an entity,
shove it in a managed object context,
but then I can turn around and
do basic assignments to do all
the setting of the attributes.
And I can use this little
chunk of code to do basically
components joined by string,
like on an NSString,
just a lot less code.
You'll also see things like, you know,
mutable set value for key,
all the proxying there works correctly,
everything else.
So in cases where there's
an NSError pointer pointer,
what PyOpc actually does is it
returns the error as a tuple.
So you get the return value and
the error as one return value.
There's a notation so you can have
it not generate the error at all
as an optimization if necessary.
Things like perform selector, you know,
it just works.
And that's the whole point of this.
And, you know, I estimate that this,
using this really probably shaved about
half my development time off this and
freed me up to really experiment with it,
as you can see in my color scheme.
So back to slides, please.
So Apple has really embraced the Ruby,
Cocoa and the PyOpc projects to
make Ruby and Python first-class
development languages for Cocoa.
And we are working very
closely with the community.
The primary developers are actually
here in the audience today.
And I wanted to get through this fairly
quickly because I imagine there's
going to be a handful of questions.
We've already posted some changes back.
The changes to the PyOpC bridge
are being hosted in a private
repository right now until we can
get permission to open it up a bit.
The Ruby Cocoa changes have actually
been changes that haven't really been,
you know,
in violation of the Leopard NDA.
So you've seen a lot of activity in
the public community on that front.
On the Leopard DVD,
most of the batteries are there.
For Ruby Cocoa, the bridge,
the interpreter is included.
You get the Xcode templates,
there's some examples,
there's documentation.
For PyObc,
we got the bridge and the interpreter in,
but the templates,
examples and documentation
is not included yet,
just because of the way
the project was structured.
It's being cleaned up.
However, you can find all those online,
and they work fine on Leopard.
That project I just showed there was
just a standard Xcode PyObc project
template that I instantiated from the,
grabbing the template from the website.
And for more information,
you've got pyobc.sourceforge.net,
you've got the
Ruby Cocoa Source Forge Project,
you've got rubycocoa.com,
which is awesome.
It has a huge write-up of
Ruby Cocoa and sort of the philosophy
of implementation behind it,
history of Next Step and AppKit and
all kinds of great information,
including even some Pyobc stuff.